a mother and daughter taking shelter
inside a church in Northern Gaza have
been killed by Israeli snipers some
witnesses say the women were shot in
Cold Blood at the Holy Family Catholic
Church one was killed while she was
carrying her elderly mother to safety
since the start of the war most have
been taking shelter inside churches Lea
Moran a British MP has relatives that
have been living inside the Holy Family
Parish Church in Gaza since the start of
the war along with most other Christians
in the Gaza Strip and I asked her when
she last spoke to her
family we last heard from them yesterday
it's worth saying that there is a comms
blackout across Gaza at the moment no
internet at all but also in the
escalating violence that we've seen uh
in and around the church uh there were
two generators that were already not
working the solar panels had been blown
out and the final generator was hit by
Israeli forces yesterday there was a
fire um and that one not just meant that
there was no electricity at all but also
helped to pump the water around the
compound so the situation I mean it's
just been awful obviously um it's been
60 days that they've been there it
swelled from about a hundred people
sleeping on mattresses and mattresses
inad of the Sunday School complex to 300
now and they are terrified having on
Tuesday seen the bin collector be uh
shot outside the uh janitor who was just
entering to fix something also shot the
body were just laying there for days and
uh since then there is a sniper we
understand that has been firing into the
compound um the Vatican has confirmed
they've killed a mother and a daughter
in this and they are just in those rooms
desperately trying to survive there's no
food there is no water and they are
scared to even venture outside the door
to go to the toilet because they are
scared to be killed so that that is
where we are are currently um and we are
very worried for their safety obviously
as as I'm sure any others who have
family in Gaza and Palestine more
generally are actually as well let's
face it it's it's not good for anybody
but I think that we've got an escalation
here and it's just worth saying you know
this is a week before Christmas um these
this is a really important time in in
the Christian calendar it makes a
mockery of the suggestion that uh the
Israeli Defense Forces are are keeping
civilians safe these they've known
they've been there for a long time
they've been there for for 60 days now
there was no prior warning we don't
understand why this is happening and I
would say to Israel please leave that
church alone please leave my family
alone and I say to the International
Community please call ardently for the
immediate ceasefires we need to make
this destruction stop but also to lift
the eyes to the lasting peace that
Christians are singing about across the
world in Advent in the runup to
Christmas Israel's military and its
government say they're hunting down
hamus Fighters um as far as you're aware
who is inside that church My Family
Christians people who sought Sanctuary
they've been basically there for two
months with very few people who they
don't know go in and out and it's worth
saying the Christian Community in
Palestine as a whole but especially in
Gaza is Tiny they they know each other
if there were Hamas tunnels underneath
commanders there you'd have thought that
they would have come to get them before
60 days um but they've decided to wait
till now and and there was no leaflet
drop there was no prior warning um as
was confirmed by the Vatican when they
weighed in yesterday so I don't know no
one understands why this is happening
but as far as my family are concerned
absolutely not they have not seen Hine
nor hair of anyone that they would
understand to want to be targeted by the
Israeli Defense Forces
um the one we wonder you know we know
that they've been wanting people to move
they've been trying to get them to move
they've been frustrated that civilians
haven't moved um but even under
international law if you tell people to
move and they don't they have every
right to stay you then have to do
everything you can to minimize civilian
casualties and in all of this including
you know they reported seeing white
phosphorus being thrown into the
compound all of this I I will be
encouraging my family who are
eyewitnesses to report into the
international criminal court um so that
when uh that is investigated that they
are part of the evidence base well
Christians in the Gaza Strip are a
minority there are only about a thousand
left in 2017 there were 3,000 father
Gabriel romanelli is the parish priest
of the Holy Family Parish in Gaza and he
says of the Christians who remain 135
are Catholics but denominations in Gaza
aren't strict and worshippers can attend
several different churches Christians
have lived in Gaza since the first
century they're thought to make up the
oldest Christian Community in the world
Archbishop Marios mavus is head of the
Greek Orthodox Church here in Doha and
he has spent some time in Gaza thank you
very much indeed for being with us sir I
understand that you have some friends
and colleagues who are in the church
that we're talking about at the moment
have you been able to contact them have
they told you what's
happening uh yes uh indeed I was uh
1999 and 2000 serving Gaza as a parish
priest and now I have people that they
are inside our Greek Orthodox
monasteries and
perfidious I have some messages I cannot
have a direct contact to them to the uh
last uh two weeks but we have uh uh from
from some messages I can hear from them
that they are alive but they are in very
uh bad
situation uh waiting for humanitarian
Aid we tried uh I mean the church steing
committee here in Doha in cooperation
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs uh
in the uh two weeks ago on the Sunday
the 3rd of December and we have uh
AR right with a a military plane uh to
Alish airport myself and the uh Reverend
father Shel from the Maronite
Church and we have carried uh humanitary
Aid uh three days after the Ministry of
Foreign first informed me that the eight
it was
was pass the trucks that carrying the
eight enter inside
Gaza Arch Bishop sorry to interrupt you
I should explain to our viewers forgive
me for interrupting you I should want to
explain to our viewers top right hand
picture that they should be seeing at
the moment is are live pictures from
Rafa Crossing and an a truck has just
gone in and as it passed through the
crossing crowds of people and I'm
assuming this is of course is on the
Gaza side crowds of people have jumped
onto the truck and are now seizing boxes
of Aid and simply throwing them into the
crowd somewhat in indiscriminately now
it's one would imagine this is not part
of the the standard procedure my
understanding is that these trucks would
be uh offloaded by uh Aid organizations
and the aid would be handed out um in a
more sort of regimented fashion but it's
perhaps an indication of the desperation
of many people in Gaza that we're seeing
these uh pictures at the moment tell me
how uh given the level of support and
Aid that you have been providing um how
frustrating is it for you to see so much
of your Aid on the Egyptian side of the
border and unable to get into Gaza at
the rate that you would want it to
go exactly I have been around in the uh
big hungers in the
Elish and I've seen uh uh hundred of
trucks they told me uh 480 trucks that
day it waiting to enter uh Gaza and only
70 or 80 maximum can enter every day and
of course the people they are desperate
and they have seen those uh pictures uh
I mean uh people that they uh just if
they see any truck going inside they try
to uh to grab any kind of food or water
or with anything that they need so it is
a picture exactly that uh illustrates
the big need of of those uh people for
uh so this has to
encourage uh and to uh people to send
more more support but also as a pressure
uh to the people that they are
controlling the entrance to uh make
easier the procedure so people they can
receive as much humanitarian Aid or food
of some clothes there is a winter so it
is they need it
badly so I would like to ask you forgive
me for interrupting you again but I I
there's something I I I do want to get
your uh your opinion on with regard to
the church that we were talking about
before and the um Christian Community
that is Sheltering inside that church
the Israeli military and the government
say that their goal is to try to defeat
Hamas Fighters that they are hunting for
Hamas fighters in order to be able to uh
uh to get get rid of them in your
understanding is there any reason why
this particular sh church should be
targeted by the Israeli
forces it was promised that it was not
going to be hated but unfortunately it
was uh also our church and also the uh
Anglican by Anglican Church running
Hospital the Baptist
hospital um uh in in Gaza and many other
hospitals and many other worship places
so of course it's not understanding um
because uh the people that they are
Refuge now and shelter inside the church
or the uh as as I know uh they are are
uh only civilian people there are people
that they lost their house so they are
asking a refuge to the to the church to
the monastery as the most safe place
that they aren't the only place that
they can stay because they are the
houses they are just uh ruined so I
don't understand uh why so many uh
children children they are victims or
lay persons um they are uh dead and they
are affected
so uh I'm very sorry for that because I
know those people that uh our community
and all the neighbors and the other
people that they are civilians they are
not military they are not
Hamas but uh this is the picture that it
is uh a different picture they have the
Israelis and this what is promoting AR
Bishop Mario M gianakis thank you very
much indeed for being with us